# Dynamic, Command-Line Driven Window Swallowing for dwm

This patch introduces "dynamic" window swallowing to dwm. In contrast to the
mechanisms of the existing ("static") [swallow
patch](https://dwm.suckless.org/patches/swallow/), dynamic window swallowing is
run-time configurable and fully scriptable via `dwmswallow`, the command-line
tool included with this patch.

## Download

- [dwm-dynamicswallow-20210221-61bb8b2.diff](dwm-dynamicswallow-20210221-61bb8b2.diff)

## 1. Usage

Window swallowing is concerned with two scenarios: an existing window may
either swallow another existing window, or it may be registered to swallow
a future window.

### 1.1 Swallowing Future Windows

Any window managed by dwm may be registered to swallow the next upcoming window
whose attributes match the class name, instance name and window title filters
using the command-line tool `dwmswallow`. Quoting from `dwmswallow -h`:

    dwmswallow SWALLOWER [-c CLASS] [-i INSTANCE] [-t TITLE]
      Register window SWALLOWER to swallow the next future window whose attributes
      match the CLASS name, INSTANCE name and window TITLE filters using basic
      string-matching. An omitted filter will match anything.

The next window whose filters match will be swallowed by SWALLOWER, taking its
place. See the following example in which a terminal launches the `surf`
browser and swallows its window, creating the impression of browsing the web
"inside" the terminal. Upon closing the browser the terminal reappears. Note
the symbol in the status bar next to the layout symbol while the swallow is
active.

![](demo.gif)

This example uses the WINDOWID environment variable to retrieve the terminal's
window id. Some terminals such as `st` or `kitty` export the variable, while
others such as `gnome-terminal` don't.

Note that swallowing is not at all restricted to terminals. Any two windows
managed by dwm may be involved. Also, window swallowing is agnostic towards
layouts, respects your usage of size hints and can be nested to arbitrary
depths.

### 1.2 Swallowing Existing Windows

Swallowing of existing windows may be performed either from the command-line
(see `dwmswallow -h`) or using drag-and-drop via pointer (*mod+shift+button1*
by default).

See the following example in which a terminal is used to launch an application
whose stdout is considered important during its startup sequence. Once the
startup finishes without errors the stdout is of no interest anymore and the
terminal window is made to swallow the application window by drag-and-dropping
the latter onto the former.

![](demo2.gif)

Afterwards, the terminal can be remapped at any time by stopping the swallow using
a hotkey (*mod+u* by default), which is not shown in the example.

### 1.3 Shell Integration

When working in a terminal a shell alias can be used to express whether
a graphical application shall open in a separate window or "inside" the
terminal. Given `alias s='dwmswallow $WINDOWID;'` the command `s myguiprog`
will run the application and swallow its window. Note that this requires the
terminal to export the WINDOWID environment variable.

Alternatively, a shell hotkey may be configured to preface the execution of
a command with `dwmswallow $WINDOWID`. For example, the following zsh
configuration will cause an application to be swallowed by the terminal when
its command is submitted by pressing *CTRL-x + Enter* as opposed to pressing
only *Enter*.

    # add to .zshrc
    bindkey '^X^m' accept-line-swallow
    zle -N accept-line-swallow acceptandswallow
    acceptandswallow() {
        dwmswallow $WINDOWID
        zle accept-line
    }

## 2. Patching Instructions

Unless your fork of dwm is only slighly modified the adaptions to the patch
listed here may be necessary or appropriate to better fit in with your existing
build.

### 2.1 Patch-Specific Geometry Parameters

When swallowing a window the swallowee copies the swallower's geometry
parameters to reposition itself to where the swallower used to be, creating the
impression of one window incorporating another. There exist patches which add
client-specific parameters that can modify a window's size or behavior. When
applying the dynamicswallow patch these parameters must be configured manually
in two places:

1. Inside `swal()`: during the swallowing of a window the swallowee shall
   inherit a copy of the swallower's values of these parameters.
2. Inside `swalstop()`: when swallowing is stopped the swallower is remapped
   and the parameters' defaults for its window have to be chosen.

As a representative example consider the
[cfacts](https://dwm.suckless.org/patches/cfacts/) patch which allows to
configure the relative sizes of windows in tiling mode using the
client-specific parameter `cfact` of type float. The two changes necessary to
accommodate this parameter are:

1. Inside `swal()`: `cfact` shall be copied from the swallower to the swallowee.

        /* Configure geometry params obtained from patches (e.g. cfacts) here. */
        swee->cfact = swer->cfact;

2. Inside `swalstop()`: the swallower's `cfact` shall be set to a sensible default.

        /* Configure geometry params obtained from patches (e.g. cfacts) here. */
        swer->cfact = 1.0;

The specific places of where to configure the parameters are marked with
comments included in the patch.

### 2.2 Inter-Process Communication

In order for `dwmswallow` to communicate with dwm some means of inter-process
communication is required which dwm does not provide by default. To this end,
this patch includes an adaption of the
[fakesignal](https://dwm.suckless.org/patches/fsignal/) patch which allows
sending commands to dwm by concatenating the command and its parameters into
a specifically formatted string and making it the name of the root window.

The fakesignal patch is lightweight, non-intrusive, easy to use and easy to
extend to other commands. If your build does not include any IPC mechanisms
there's no reason to not use fakesignal as a starting point. Its only downside
is that the communication is unidirectional: one may send commands to dwm but
dwm cannot send a reply in return.

If your build of dwm does contain an IPC mechanism you may, of course, use your
existing communication pathways. While there's nothing wrong with using
fakesignal to try out the patch you will eventually want to seemlessly
integrate everything into your existing build. To achieve this you'll have to

1. relay the execution of `dwmswallow SWALLOWER SWALLOWEE` to a call to `swal()`.
2. relay the execution of `dwmswallow -c CLASS -i INSTANCE -t TITLE` to a call to `swalreg()`.
3. relay the execution of `dwmswallow -s` to a call to `swalstop()`.
4. relay the execution of `dwmswallow -d` to a call to `swalunreg()`.

using your IPC mechanism of choice.

## 3. Assorted Notes and Implementation Details

Consult this section if you're interested in changing the default behavior or
if you're curious about the internals of the patch. The content herein is
presented in no particular order.

### 3.1 Swallow Indicator in Status Bar

If the currently selected window on a monitor is being swallowed a
tongue-symbol ðŸ‘… (U+1F445) is drawn on the status bar next to the layout
symbol. If this is undesired remove the relevant commented section from
`drawbar()` or change the symbol in your *config.h*.

### 3.2 Retroactive Swallowing

When registering the swallow of a future window using the window title as
filter the swallowing may fail for some applications if retroactive swallowing
is disabled (set by `swalretroactive`). This is due to the fact these
applications create their window using a default window title and only update
it later to the proper, usage-specific value. When dwm checks whether any
registed swallows match the window's title it finds that none do due to the
usage of the default window title when the window is mapped.

If retroactive swallowing is enabled each time a window changes its title dwm
checks whether a registered swallow instance matches the window and executes it
accordingly. If you find yourself wanting to filter by window title keep
retroactive swallowing enabled. While things are small, as they usually are,
the runtime costs are completely negligible.

An example of this is the PDF viewer zathura. Zathura's window title reflects
the currently viewed file and may be used to register swallows of PDF previews
filtered by filename. However, zathura's startup sequence exhibits the above
behavior and the window title is set to reflect the filename only after a
default window title has been used.

    # This requires retroactive swallowing
    dwmswallow $WINDOWID -c Zathura -t ~/books/xlib.pdf
    zathura ~/books/xlib.pdf

### 3.3 Decaying of Registered Swallows

It occasionally happens that swallows are registered but not consumed, either
due to misspelling the filters, causing them to never match or because the
user's intention has changed along the way. If `swaldecay` is set to a value
greater than zero any registered swallow instance is deleted if it hasn't been
consumed after so many new windows are mapped, i.e. after *swaldecay*
unsuccessful matches.

### 3.4 `wintoclient()` vs `wintoclient2()`

Regular clients, swallowees and swallowers each require different handling by
dwm with respect to X request and notify events (map, unmap, delete, configure,
...) for their respective windows.

In order to distinguish between the three classes of clients during runtime the
function `wintoclient2()` extends the functionality of the built-in
`wintoclient()`. In addition to retrieving the address of a window's client
from the window ID, it also returns the client type. It entails a change in
signature which is responsible for the majority of changes made by the patch
except for self-contained function definitions.

## Author

- Stanislaw HÃ¼ll (st@nislaw.de)
